Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu says Israel should take
control of the Philadelphia Corridor on
gaza's border with Egypt the corridor is
a 14 km strip of land on the southern
end of Gaza Philadelphia the
Philadelphia Corridor or to put it more
correctly the southern stoppage point of
Gaza must be in our hands it must be
shut it is clear that any other
Arrangement would not ensure the
demilitarization that we
seek let's take a closer look now at the
Philadelphia corridor Israel says one of
the purposes of the corridor is to
monitor the movement of goods and people
between Egypt and the Gaza Strip and to
search for weapons Israel believes there
are hundreds of smuggling tunnels there
and has previously conducted military
operations to destroy
them when it was established as a buffer
zone under the Egypt Israel peace treaty
of 1979 Israel controlled the corridor
until 2005 when it withdrew from the
strip after which Egyptian Security
Forces began patrolling the area two
years later Hamas came into power in
Gaza both Egypt and Hamas strongly
oppose Israel's control over the
corridor because it would effectively
sever the Gaza strip's only land
connection to
Egypt Rami kurri is the director of
global engagement at the American
University of Beirut he joins us live
now from Boston welcome to the program
first let me ask you how significant do
you think is Benjamin netanyahu's
statement about the Philadelphia
Corridor you know it's hard to take uh
anything that Netanyahu says totally
factually um but he's constantly
negotiating he's constantly boasting
he's bluffing he's uh appealing to
different audiences uh he wants his
domestic audience to feel reassured he
wants to scare the uh the Palestinians
uh he wants to negotiate with the
Egyptians he wants to get more support
from the Americans so anything he says
has multiple audiences multiple purposes
and should should not be taken at face
value but we do know that there's two
things that the Israelis have always
wanted since the be creation of their
state in 1948 they want um a territory
and security a territory for security to
be secure and they want to um in many
phases including this government expand
the land of the state of Israel to
include what they call parts of the
Biblical land of Israel so they have
this Messianic biblical theological
drive and they have the security Drive
neither of those has ever really brought
them security the more that they expand
the more they control land the more they
try to be secure by taking over people's
lands driving people out of their homes
the less secure they become because they
just instigate greater and more intense
forms of resistance by Palestinians and
and by other PE Lebanese that happened
with Hezbollah and Lebanon and in
Palestine with Hamas and Islamic Jihad
so we have to just take this as one
element that he's throwing into the
negotiating pot because there are
serious negotiations going on to resolve
the immediate issues which is the uh the
Israeli genocidal assault on Gaza the uh
prisoners and hostages and detainees on
both sides uh to get a ceasefire all
these things have to be negotiated and
then maybe what comes after that so this
is I see this purely as one more uh
element he's throwing in there uh to to
be negotiated and with and with that
element forgive me with that element I
mean how much tension does that
potentially create amongst other
Regional players like
Egypt well the Egyptians will not accept
uh giving that territory to uh to n yeah
to the Israelis um they negotiated in
1979 with the Egyptian Israeli peace
treaty and that U Corridor was created
they agreed that Egypt would Patrol it I
think with 750 troops and all kinds of
specified arms um uh they don't seem to
have done a very good job because
there's all these tunnels underneath it
and and Hamas and Traders and students
and people needing Medical Aid can come
in and out of Gaza using that area uh
and that's what Israel presumably wants
to stop and and Hamas and the
Palestinians in Gaza want to not stop it
because it's their only Outlet to the
world the Israelis control the Sea and
the west and the North and the east of
Gaza the south is the only part that
leads Gaza right onto an Arab territory
it's also where the leaders of Gaza of
Hamas and other groups uh Community
leaders U you know Educators
industrialists whatever uh they can come
in and out of Gaza using that route so
given given what given what you say then
what could this mean for the population
of Gaza going ahead who are already
suffering so much from this
war well this is again an unknown
because we're in the middle of a of a
intense uh military assault by Israel
and an in intense diplomatic negotiation
and in the context of both of those both
sides are going to say things that try
to give them more Advantage Hamas
doesn't speak too much in public it
makes statements through its official
spokesperson once every few days and
occasionally some of their leaders in
Lebanon and um and qar and in Egypt make
a statement but not too much the the
Israeli politicians are totally
different nyaho in particular um he he's
never seen a television camera that he
doesn't fall in love with and he he
loves to speak and and and he's he's
trying desperately to show show how
tough he is how this time we're really
going to destroy Hamas which he said
four times before using military force
this time he's using much more drastic
Force destroying the whole society the
schools the hospitals the Water Systems
uh but this is part of it you have to
see him as part of this sort of
performance political performance it's
serious stuff you're telling you're
talking about a state that was attacked
on October 7 to a limited extent uh and
then it responded with this massive
unlimited uh assault back on uh on Gaza
but this is a political process uh and
he wants to make it point to his people
uh that that this is what he's going to
do because there's a huge amount of
opposition to him inside Israel also he
may be doing this partly to U come up
with a negotiating point card that he
can uh trade in to get more arms from
the US maybe the Egyptians will will
play along at some point and get more
Aid if they allow something maybe
they'll say let's do joint patrols I'm
just guessing I have no evidence for
this but I don't think so I don't think
people want to give Israel more
territorial control of Arab lands we
want them to get out of the Arab lands
and shift into a political negotiation
which would give the Israelis and the
Palestinians their full rights like the
Egyptians got their full rights when
they made peace with Israel so given
given what you say then forgive me given
what you say how does this Philadelphia
Corridor issue play into Israel's
overall military strategy in its war on
Gaza well they think Israel thinks it's
very important because they feel that
Hamas has been getting a lot of its
military equipment through there but if
they're going to destroy hamash as they
say then you know that hamash is not
going to be there to get more equipment
uh so it doesn't it doesn't make a lot
of sense uh to me at least U the uh
future of Gaza was going to be part of
Palestine that includes the West Bank
and maybe down the road parts of East
Jerusalem we'll see uh these are all
factors that have to be negotiated and
there's no way you can guess what they
are um now but there's Gaza clearly he
says they want he wants Nano says that
Gaza has to be
demilitarized um and he used a crazy
term the other day that the population
has to be deradicalized I mean this is
television CNN stuff this is performance
for uh for the world this is not serious
political uh statesmanship um so we but
this it does give you a hint that
security is so important to them which
is understandable given what they
suffered under white racist Europeans
and Russians and North
Americans 7 80 100 years ago security is
so important to them um that they want
to defend it and they see land
controlling other people's lands as
bringing them security but it doesn't so
they're still they're obsessed with this
and this is another way they've done
this they tried in Lebanon they
controlled Gaza they got out of Gaza
they got out of Lebanon they still en
Circle Gaza but they want this piece of
land because it will give them total
encirclement of Gaza it'll have no it
will leave no outlet for the people of
Gaza to come and go without having to
pass through some kind of Israeli
checkpoint and this is not going to be
acceptable Hamas won't accept it the PA
won't accept it nobody will accept this
we'll leave it there for now Ramy curri
thank you very much indeed for your
insights here on Al jazer thank
you